So, now we have MutationObservers ...
Again it's another of these bad documented and awkward API's.

That's the crux with event-driven communication. You might not know
who is interested in an event, so you have to 'broadcast' it by
asking each and every member: "Are you interested in this event?".
This sounds slow. And it is. And the reason for deprecating mutation 
events like e.g. DOMSubtreeModified. Now you have register yourself
as a listener to modifation events.

I have a sneaking suspicion that this is just due to bad
implementation of the DOM event distribution system. The DOM knows
exactly who is interested in which event. But ... its own messages are
polluting the tree of DOM-Elements the whole time and the internal routing
of their own messages is highly intransparent/ badly documented.
My guess is that guys that can handle the complexity of the DOM implementation
are hard to find. And doing it cleanly from scratch is no option because
the whole internet is relying on the old shit.

Only god knows why browser vendors are using clean interfaces and
classes internally and give users such a fragile, slow and error-prown
DOM-API (which leads to all sorts of spaghetti-code).
One has to tame window, document and all the other global monsters.
Their all-round accessabilty prevents encapsulation very effectively.

With an object-oriented observer (publish-subscribe) pattern however
their is a direct connection between observable and listener, which
is more performant and also much cleaner.

Talking about clean interfaces brings me to another point:
Creating an element via document.createElement(TAGNAME) gives you
an object with a sheer endless list of mostly useless properties.
it then has to be appended to a parents' child list. What you get in
the end is a tree structure of elements each coming with a large
inheritance chain and a ton of properties and event function pointers.
90 percent of them rarely or never used.
This is a complexity nightmare called DOM. 

